## What is "Empire"?
You (dear reader) have surely heard the term "empire", and of examples like the Mali Empire in Africa, the Maya Empire in the Americas, and the Mongol Empire in Eurasia. So you already have an idea of what an empire is.

In our usage, we take inspiration from the decolonial essayist and artist Muindi Fanuel Muindi who has explained it clearly in his essay [The Desertion of Empire](https://www.solutionsforpostmodernliving.org/world-building-blog/towards-the-desertion-of-empire). He distinguishes between **empires** (spelled with a small "e") which are the historical entities like the ones we have described above. By contrast, **Empire** (with a capital "E") is the underlying social, political, economic, and cultural system. We can think of Empire as the template, and individual empires as instances created from this template.

There are some usual traits which many (if not all) empires share. We can distill these and call them fundamental traits of Empire. Of course, throughout history there have been countless empires and exceptions to all of the traits have existed. Nevertheless, they represent the essence of what Empire means. Here they are:
- **Hierarchy and stratification**: Empire thrives on hierarchy between people, and the separation of social classes. At the top there are the elites who have the most rights, and they make decisions and call the shots. Below them are the middle class, who might be considered full citizens or members of the Empire and have some rights, but are still subordinate to the elites and have to actually work for a living. Finally, there are the lower class with the least rights, whose bodies are used for service or labor. Usually, the greed and delusion of the elites, coupled with the ambition of the middle class and the exploitation of the lower class(es) drives the growth of Empire.
- **Expansion and extraction**: just as the nature of a cancer cell is to grow and reproduce without end, and the nature of a virus is to seek out host cells to hijack their genetic material for itself, the nature of Empire is to expand and extract. In most of history, this happened by empires using armies to invade the lands of their neighbors and annex them and take over their productivity. Now it also includes economic and financial domination. More on this later.
- **Control and domination**: to maintain its existence, Empire has to continuously assert its superiority over rivals and competitors. This can be done by instilling a sense of ethnic, cultural, religious, or linguistic superiority in its citizens. Usually, empires will do this by creating myths (e.g. a religious origin of the first emperor) that show them as eternal, and more worthy of owning and ruling land than their competitors. The elites create these myths, the middle class buys into them, and the lower classes are forced to bring these myths alive through their sweat and blood.
- **Standardization and homogenization**: Empire cannot tolerate diversity of thought. It has to enforce uniform standards and customs over everybody who lives under its rule. This is done ostensibly to make trade and communication easier (by having uniform weights and currency and language, for example), but the real reason is to make control over its subjects easier. Having the same religion, language, and culture makes extraction easier as well. Of course, not everything is about economics or money. Sometimes, destroying co-existing cultures and replacing them with their own is the ultimate end-goal of the elites. Hubris and hatefulness can be more powerful drivers of human behavior than money.

Not every empire in history had all of these characteristics. There are many examples of great multicultural, multilinguistic empires. There have also been empires that are less brutal and extractivistic than others. However, these traits are the hard bones that make up the skeleton of Empire today. That brings us to the next question.

## Why is this relevant now?
Things are going very badly now for most Life on Earth. The reasons for this are clear: the actions of a few people. This is acknowledged even in the scientific community, and the scientific community is a conservative knowledge system. Human activity has destroyed entire branches of the tree of Life and is actively hurting the Earth. This is not an unintended side-effect but rather the explicit strategy of the system known as Empire.

The physical effects of Empire are widely talked about - climate change, biodiversity loss, pollution being the main ones. But Empire is also in the mind. The most basic questions of who we are, what we know, and what we do, have some possible answers that Empire prefers more than others.

These crises together are often called the polycrisis which threatens the very existence of the biosphere of Earth, at least in this state. Already weather patterns are changing, extreme weather is becoming more common. Human society is in a state of unrest and change. Other Life on Earth is dying out, except for those that are useful to us. Human society, greedy for energy and materials, is stripping the Earth bare in parts to extract minerals, metals, and carbon. Other parts are covered by intensive cropland, mostly monocultures artificially maintained and protected.

But has this come to be, and why is this still allowed? To understand, we need to ask *who or what* exactly has caused this, and continues to allow it.  
